Regarding the PTSD documentation - can you confirm you have medical records documenting both:

The initial PTSD diagnosis after the March 26th break-in
Evidence of exacerbation/worsening due to Luther’s inaction on security measures?

Yes, a psychologist in florida evaluated Stephen Boerner in or around April 2024 and issued the PTSD diagnosis. The tenant, Stephen Boerner, was prescribed pharmaceuticals to help treat the PTSD and it was recommended to increase current in-person therapy from once every 2 weeks to once per week which was followed and began in or around April/May 2024. 

The therapist was/is Mark Sieg who last evaluated and held a therapy session with Stephen Boerner in November 2024 after the coercive phone calls, voicemails, and text messages from landlord, Luther Rollins, Jr. where the topic the tenant needed therapy for was the increased symptoms and suffering caused by the intimidation tactics from teh landlord when the tenants certified tenant dispute specifically specific written communication to avoid the trauma resurfacing and driving panic attacks and high anxiets. 

All is documented from the diagnosis of PTSD, the medications given and taken by the tenant, and the therapy sessions with Mark Sieg of Gulfport, Florida. 


For the property conversion claim, I see the Weber grill was advertised as a rental amenity. Can you confirm:

The exact date you first attempted to retrieve your property: September 4th, 2024 via text message to both Luther Rollins, Jr. the landlord and his realtory hired proxy named Zach Steinberger, of Compass Realty 

Any written communication (texts, emails) documenting your retrieval attempts: 

Yes, i have text messages documented to both Luther Rollins, Jr. the landlord and his realtory hired proxy named Zach Steinberger, of Compass Realty. Zach replied on september 4th to these messages stating he was instructed by Luther to cease all communication. Luther failed to reply at all. 

There was no reply from Luther Rollins, the landlord to tenant requests to recoup personal belongings. 


The date the property first appeared in rental listings: The tenant, Stephen Boerner, vacated the property on September 2nd, 2024. The alleged inspection of the property was on or around September 4th done by both Zach Steinberger and Luther Rollins, Jr. The claim on security deposit letter was written on October 1st, and mailed via certified mail on October 2nd, 2024. This was within the 30 day requirement and the landlord met this timeframe obligation to make a claim on security deposits however failing in itemization, costs, etc. The property was relisted for rent on October 5th, 2024 and has remained for rent on multiple renter platforms as of this writing on December 21st, 2024. 

Whether any witnesses can verify seeing your grill still at the property: Yes, John Roman and Anthony Harwelik


Regarding Luther’s pattern of neglect and bad faith:

Do you have documentation of the initial maintenance request for the clogged sink?:

Yes, it was sent to Luther Rollins on January 10th, 2024 and went unresponded to. The tenant then texted Luther Rollins on January 25th 2024 to inform Luther the landlord that the tenant resolved the clogged sink regardless of the lack of response from the landlord. 

After the break-in, was Luther’s acknowledgment of the faulty gate captured in writing?:

No, it was verbalized when Luther called the tenant to learn more about the home invasion. It was verbalized and taken seriously by the tenant as a committment to the tenants safety. 

When he restricted camera installation, was that in writing? 

He restricted camera installation March 28th, 2024: 

The restriction was allowing, not offering, the tenant to pay for installation of cameras. Note: the rented home is the only home on Tifton St. without security cameras due to increased petty crime and close approximation to bad neighborhoods. 

The restriction continued into his requirement stated “as long as no drilling”

On his recent pressure tactics:

Do you have records (phone logs, voicemails, texts) showing the frequency and timing of his attempts to get you to speak by phone?:

Yes i have everything documented, from the voice mail audio messages, the transcripts of the voice mails left, the timelog of activity regarding phone communication, the text messages, i have everything. 

Did he specifically reference being “amicable” or suggest you were legally required to speak by phone?:

Yes, he implied speaking on the phone was the definition of amicable and by law, being amaicable, was a requirement and avoiding a phone call would be otherwise deemed non-amicable and non-cooperating of the law. 


STATUTORY LEVERAGE:


Did Luther ever provide written notice about where your security deposit was being held?:

The tenant, Luther, did not provide documentation of where the security deposit was kept within the first 30 days of the lease starting. The tenant requested information about the number of rental properties in Florida owned by the landlord, as it would affect their obligations to the tenant. The lease was signed by Mary O. Polk and Luther Rollins, Jr., but rent was instructed to be mailed to Amarlu Enterprises, a North Carolina entity owned by Luther Rollins, Jr. and Mary O. Polk.


Was there any disclosure about whether it was in an interest-bearing account? No. There was zero information given and no disclosure of whether it was in an interest-bearing account.


Do you know if Luther owns/manages 5+ rental units in Florida? (This triggers additional statutory requirements): 

No, I can assume he doesn’t, but I do not know. I also do not know if Amarlu Enterprises, who i was instructed to send monthly rent payment to, owns/manages 5+ rental units in Florida. Note, upon move in, tenants received a pre-stamped, pre-addressed envelope for each month of the lease term. The envelopes were pre-addressed to Luther Rollins, Jr. with attention to Amarlu Enterprises. The rental checks written by the tenant and included in this pre-addressed envelopes were instructed to be writtenout to “Amarlu Enterprises”, therefore with a 10 month lease term, the tenant mailed Amarlu Enterprises invididual checks for each month of the lease term plus a check for security deposit + pet fee. All checks and envelopes were written out to Amarlu Enterprises, not Luther Rollins, Jr. 

HARASSMENT & INTIMIDATION:


How many total phone calls and voicemails did Luther make after you specified certified mail communication? Four phone calls, three voicemails, 1 text message. 

Do you have the actual voicemail recordings preserved? 

Yes, I have all audio copies of the actual voicemail recordings. 

What exact language did he use suggesting phone calls were required?

On Tue, Oct 29 at 5:55 PM Luther’s text message was as follows:

“Hi Stephen,
I called you a couple times today to discuss the Tenant Response & Dispute you sent to me which I recently received. I hope we could talk (and I believe we are both supposed to) try to resolve amicably. I am available most days this week 9:00am-ish till about 10pm.
Thanks! Luther”


Did his pattern of calls/messages notably increase after receiving your tenant dispute letter?

Yes, they started and ended within a 48 hour period and such patterns did not occur before he received the tenant dispute letter 

Below is an example of one text message but there were three voicemails three missed calls and one text message within 48 hours. ￼

On Tue, Oct 29 at 5:55 PM Luther’s text message was as follows:

“Hi Stephen,
I called you a couple times today to discuss the Tenant Response & Dispute you sent to me which I recently received. I hope we could talk (and I believe we are both supposed to) try to resolve amicably. I am available most days this week 9:00am-ish till about 10pm.
Thanks! Luther”


UNREGISTERED BUSINESS OPERATIONS:
 

Do you have copies of the pre-stamped envelopes directing payments to Amarlu Enterprises?:

Yes, I took pictures of them. 

Can you confirm total rent paid to this unregistered entity?  $45,000 was the total rent due over a lease term of 10 months. 45,000 over 10 months = $5,000 for two deposits. $4,500 was the monthly rent amount, $4,500 was the security deposit amount, and $500 for a pet deposit. 

At lease signing, it was instructed by Zach Steinberger (the real estate agent) in writting via text message to make the move-in cashiers check payable Luther Rollins, Jr. which matched the name on the lease. this was for $14,000 which included first month’s rent, last month’s rent, security deposit, and the pet deposit. at the end of month one, Luther sent a package via snail mail which included eight pre-addressed, pre-stamped envelopes. The instructions provided eight envelopes addressed to Amarlu Enterprises at a Hickory, North Carolina United States post office but the address was lacking the “PO Box #” and was posing as a suite number and it was confirmed that Luther Rollins did not have street addressing services with the United States post office. envelopes were used and rent checks made payable to Amarlu Enterprises and mailed in accordance to the instructions for months two through nine since the first month and last month were paid at least signing.

Did Luther ever disclose Amarlu’s role in any lease documents? 

No. The lease does not include any mention of Amarlu Enterprises. It was never disclosed. Amarlu Enterprises first emerged in the picture after lease signing and at the time of move-in when pre-stamped, pre-addressed envelopes (of which I have pictures of to prove they existed), and were instructed to write checks to Amarlu Enterprises - I have check images from my bank to document payment from Stephen Boerner to Amarlu Enterprises for every and all payments related to the lease term. Furthermore, there are five sections of the lease that mandate the landlord to provide their address; This information is crucial for various purposes, such as sending notices and rent payments. A most crucial aspect to consider in this case is that in all five instances where the landlord should have entered his North Carolina primary address in Hickory, North Carolina, Luther Rollins, Jr. used 2649 Tifton St S. Gulfport, FL 33711 - this is the same address of the home he was renting the tenants in the lease. and the realtor from COMPASS Florida, LLC (Zach Steinberger) oversaw this and allowed it.


SAFETY & SECURITY:


After the break-in, did Luther ever provide written acknowledgment of:

The intruder’s criminal history:

Yes, he commmented in writing to what was sent to him by the tenant which was a website of the intruder’s public arrest record, which at the time, included 40 arrests and 9 felonies. i shared the pdf of the full attest record i downloaded from pinellas county website. The landlord responded to receiving that as follows:

- “The perpetrator sounds like a bad person and repeat petty criminal...
- “The city and society don’t really have a good answer re what punishment for people like that...
- “No respect for others and no interest in rehab” - meaning no interest in rehabilitating themselves as criminals.


Your expressed fears about retaliation? 

He was emotionless but did acknowledge as follows:

“I’m okay with you getting motion detector cameras as long as no drilling. Other renters have installed them up here. Also maybe put a plastic sign in the yard that says video surveillance. Might be a deterrent too.
Let’s hope that this is an isolated and 1-time only event. 
I plan to come down in April to check on things.”


Your request for metal gates with locks? 

My text stated: “We’d also feel safer with metal, lockable gates” - this was only a mention of the tenant because it was recommended as a required fix by the landlord when speaking on the phone after the break-in. The landlord never responded the text mentioning the request to feel safer with metal gates, nor made any effort to pay for improvements, install cameras, or even repair the deteriated wooden gates, not repair the faulty latch that failed to even lock, let alone latch. 

I futher stated: “As of now, they don’t lock, and he knows that.” - in reference to the side gates that fail to lock and in reference to “he” being the individual, Brian Borland, who was found guilty of tresspassing and whom invaded the home on  March 26th, 2024


Do you have documentation showing neighboring properties had security cameras while yours was restricted? 

Yes, I have all video surveilance from teh neighbors across the street. This captures the perpetrators car entering the drive wasy of 2649 Tifton St. S Gulfport, FL in addition to capturing the multiple police cars and ambulances that responded to the 911 call. 


REALTOR CONFLICTS:


Do you have communications showing Zach Steinberger acted as both:

The listing agent for sale?: 

Yes


The rental agent/property manager?: 

Yes. And further, TurboTenant was the application and lease signing platform and was a platform that Zach oversaw. In that platform, it stated the landlord was Zach Steinberger. The tenant asked for clarification as to why this was the detail found on the platform the lease was held. Zach stated it was incorrect error. This was over email and I have everything documented.


Any evidence of Steinberger discontinuing communication on Luther’s instruction?:

Yes. It was stated in a text message. I have it documented. 


Documentation of Steinberger’s “professional opinion” about damages?: 

Yes, Luther included an email from Zach Steinberger written to Luther Rollins that stated his “professional opinion”



STRATEGIC DOCUMENTATION:


Do you have before/after photos of the property condition? I only have before and during pictures. i dont have move out photos 

Any witness statements from neighbors about property condition? Yes. My Mother was visiting in early-mid August and can testify to the property condition being appropriate and clean. John Roman can also testify to the property condition being appropriate and clean as of the end of the lease term. 

Records of all maintenance requests and Luther’s responses/non-responses?: 

Yes. I have it all documented 

Documentation of storm-related moving delays that affected property retrieval? 

yes, I have documented texts from my friend who was scheduled to help me move and becuase of the storms coming, he forgot about the moving day plan which was for August 31st, 2024. He informed me he was in Rhode Island and implied he forgot. 

I’ll continue my thorough analysis of the knowledge base while awaiting your responses. These details will help us craft a devastatingly effective response that:

Demonstrates willful misconduct beyond mere negligence
Establishes multiple layers of statutory violations
Shows clear patterns of harassment and intimidation
Documents systematic business law violations