
The 2024 Florida Statutes

Title XL
REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY

Chapter 715
PROPERTY: GENERAL PROVISIONS

----


BELOW IS:

CHAPTER 715
PROPERTY: GENERAL PROVISIONS

-----

TABLE OF CONTENTS:

715.02 Prohibiting recovery from seller of forfeited deposit or down payment made by check, draft, or obligation refused through no fault of seller.
715.03 Laundries and drycleaners; disposition of unclaimed articles.
715.06 Real estate; exploration for minerals.
715.065 Jewelry stores; television or radio repair stores; disposition of unclaimed articles.
715.07 Vehicles or vessels parked on private property; towing.
715.075 Vehicles parked on private property; rules and rates authorized.
715.10 Disposition of Personal Property Landlord and Tenant Act; short title.
715.101 Application of ss. 715.10-715.111.
715.102 Definitions of terms used in ss. 715.10-715.111.
715.103 Lost property.
715.104 Notification of former tenant of personal property remaining on premises after tenancy has terminated.
715.105 Form of notice concerning abandoned property to former tenant.
715.106 Form of notice concerning abandoned property to owner other than former tenant.
715.107 Storage of abandoned property.
715.108 Release of personal property.
715.109 Sale or disposition of abandoned property.
715.11 Nonliability of landlord after disposition of property.
715.111 Assessing costs of storage.
715.12 Construction Contract Prompt Payment Law.



------


715.02 Prohibiting recovery from seller of forfeited deposit or down payment made by check, draft, or obligation refused through no fault of seller.—In any action by any person against the seller of real property for any share of a forfeited deposit or down payment by a prospective purchaser, no check, draft, or other obligation of such prospective purchaser shall be construed to be a deposit and the action shall not be maintained by any person against the seller by reason thereof, if payment of said check, draft, or obligation is refused through no fault of the seller, notwithstanding any recitation of a receipt of said deposit in any written agreement.
History.—s. 1, ch. 24304, 1947; s. 11, ch. 25035, 1949.
715.03 Laundries and drycleaners; disposition of unclaimed articles.—If any person shall fail to claim any garment, clothing, household article, or other articles delivered for laundering, cleaning, or pressing to any laundry or drycleaning establishment for a period of 6 months after the delivery of such article for laundering, cleaning, or processing, the laundry or drycleaning establishment to whom the garment, clothing, or household article is delivered shall have the right to dispose of such garment, clothing, or household article by whatsoever means it may choose without incurring liability or responsibility to the owner provided, however, that before such laundry or drycleaning establishment may claim the benefits of this section it shall at the time of the receiving of such garment, clothing, or household articles, give to the individual delivering such article notice in writing that the articles so delivered may be disposed of by such laundry or drycleaning establishment unless such articles are reclaimed within 6 months from date of delivery to such laundry or drycleaning establishments. Provided, further, that if any garment, clothing, household article, or other articles referred to above is left at a laundry or drycleaning establishment for storage, and insurance is charged for thereon, then, in that event, the said 6 months as set forth above in this section shall not start to run until the period for which the article so insured has expired and when the time for which the insurance on said garment, clothing, or household article shall have expired then the laundry or drycleaning establishment may dispose of the property as though no insurance had been placed on said property in the same way as is provided hereinabove in this section.
History.—s. 1, ch. 57-416.
715.06 Real estate; exploration for minerals.—Where title to the surface of real property and title to the subsurface and minerals on or under such real property is divided into different ownerships, then the surface owner and her or his heirs, successors, and assigns shall be entitled to explore, drill, and prospect such real property, including the subsurface thereof, for all minerals except oil, gas, and sulphur without being liable to the owners of the minerals, or any party or parties claiming under such owners, for any damages or for the value of such minerals, as it is usual by customary prospecting methods and procedures to take from such land for the purpose of analyzing and determining the kind and extent thereof.
History.—s. 1, ch. 67-120; s. 838, ch. 97-102.
715.065 Jewelry stores; television or radio repair stores; disposition of unclaimed articles.—If any person fails to claim any article of jewelry or other article delivered to a jewelry store or television or radio repair store for repair, cleaning, or adjustment, for a period of 6 months after such delivery for a television or radio repair store and 1 year after such delivery for a jewelry store, the store shall have the right to dispose of such jewelry or other article by whatever means it may choose, without incurring liability or responsibility to the owner of such jewelry or other article. However, before the jewelry store or television or radio repair store may claim the benefits of this section, it shall, at the time of receiving such jewelry or other article, give to the individual delivering such jewelry or other article notice in writing that the jewelry or other article delivered may be disposed of by the jewelry store or television or radio repair store unless the jewelry or other article is reclaimed within the above-stated time periods. Notice by certified mail shall be given to the person who deposits the jewelry or other article of the intended disposition thereof 15 days prior to said disposition, or such time period that the parties agree to in writing. Any value of the jewelry or other articles sold or disposed of pursuant to this section which is in excess of the costs and expenses incurred by the store shall be tendered to the person who deposited the article, within 15 days after the sale or other disposition of the article.
History.—s. 1, ch. 76-255; s. 1, ch. 95-167.
715.07 Vehicles or vessels parked on private property; towing.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Vehicle” means any mobile item which normally uses wheels, whether motorized or not.
(b) “Vessel” means every description of watercraft, barge, and airboat used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, other than a seaplane or a “documented vessel” as defined in s. 327.02.
(2) The owner or lessee of real property, or any person authorized by the owner or lessee, which person may be the designated representative of the condominium association if the real property is a condominium, may cause any vehicle or vessel parked on such property without her or his permission to be removed by a person regularly engaged in the business of towing vehicles or vessels, without liability for the costs of removal, transportation, or storage or damages caused by such removal, transportation, or storage, under any of the following circumstances:
(a) The towing or removal of any vehicle or vessel from private property without the consent of the registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of that vehicle or vessel is subject to substantial compliance with the following conditions and restrictions:
1.a. Any towed or removed vehicle or vessel must be stored at a site within a 10-mile radius of the point of removal in any county of 500,000 population or more, and within a 15-mile radius of the point of removal in any county of fewer than 500,000 population. That site must be open for the purpose of redemption of vehicles on any day that the person or firm towing such vehicle or vessel is open for towing purposes, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and, when closed, shall have prominently posted a sign indicating a telephone number where the operator of the site can be reached at all times. Upon receipt of a telephoned request to open the site to redeem a vehicle or vessel, the operator shall return to the site within 1 hour or she or he will be in violation of this section.
b. If no towing business providing such service is located within the area of towing limitations set forth in sub-subparagraph a., the following limitations apply: any towed or removed vehicle or vessel must be stored at a site within a 20-mile radius of the point of removal in any county of 500,000 population or more, and within a 30-mile radius of the point of removal in any county of fewer than 500,000 population.
2. The person or firm towing or removing the vehicle or vessel shall, within 30 minutes after completion of such towing or removal, notify the municipal police department or, in an unincorporated area, the sheriff, of such towing or removal, the storage site, the time the vehicle or vessel was towed or removed, and the make, model, color, and license plate number of the vehicle or description and registration number of the vessel and shall obtain the name of the person at that department to whom such information was reported and note that name on the trip record.
3. A person in the process of towing or removing a vehicle or vessel from the premises or parking lot in which the vehicle or vessel is not lawfully parked must stop when a person seeks the return of the vehicle or vessel. The vehicle or vessel must be returned upon the payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one-half of the posted rate for the towing or removal service as provided in subparagraph 6. The vehicle or vessel may be towed or removed if, after a reasonable opportunity, the owner or legally authorized person in control of the vehicle or vessel is unable to pay the service fee. If the vehicle or vessel is redeemed, a detailed signed receipt must be given to the person redeeming the vehicle or vessel.
4. A person may not pay or accept money or other valuable consideration for the privilege of towing or removing vehicles or vessels from a particular location.
5. Except for property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a single-family residence, and except for instances when notice is personally given to the owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle or vessel that the area in which that vehicle or vessel is parked is reserved or otherwise unavailable for unauthorized vehicles or vessels and that the vehicle or vessel is subject to being removed at the owner’s or operator’s expense, any property owner or lessee, or person authorized by the property owner or lessee, before towing or removing any vehicle or vessel from private property without the consent of the owner or other legally authorized person in control of that vehicle or vessel, must post a notice meeting the following requirements:
a. The notice must be prominently placed at each driveway access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property within 10 feet from the road, as defined in s. 334.03(22). If there are no curbs or access barriers, the signs must be posted not fewer than one sign for each 25 feet of lot frontage.
b. The notice must clearly indicate, in not fewer than 2-inch high, light-reflective letters on a contrasting background, that unauthorized vehicles will be towed away at the owner’s expense. The words “tow-away zone” must be included on the sign in not fewer than 4-inch high letters.
c. The notice must also provide the name and current telephone number of the person or firm towing or removing the vehicles or vessels.
d. The sign structure containing the required notices must be permanently installed with the words “tow-away zone” not fewer than 3 feet and not more than 6 feet above ground level and must be continuously maintained on the property for not fewer than 24 hours before the towing or removal of any vehicles or vessels.
e. The local government may require permitting and inspection of these signs before any towing or removal of vehicles or vessels being authorized.
f. A business with 20 or fewer parking spaces satisfies the notice requirements of this subparagraph by prominently displaying a sign stating “Reserved Parking for Customers Only Unauthorized Vehicles or Vessels Will be Towed Away At the Owner’s Expense” in not fewer than 4-inch high, light-reflective letters on a contrasting background.
g. A property owner towing or removing vessels from real property must post notice, consistent with the requirements in sub-subparagraphs a.-f., which apply to vehicles, that unauthorized vehicles or vessels will be towed away at the owner’s expense.
A business owner or lessee may authorize the removal of a vehicle or vessel by a towing company when the vehicle or vessel is parked in such a manner that restricts the normal operation of business; and if a vehicle or vessel parked on a public right-of-way obstructs access to a private driveway the owner, lessee, or agent may have the vehicle or vessel removed by a towing company upon signing an order that the vehicle or vessel be removed without a posted tow-away zone sign.

6. Any person or firm that tows or removes vehicles or vessels and proposes to require an owner, operator, or person in control or custody of a vehicle or vessel to pay the costs of towing and storage before redemption of the vehicle or vessel must file and keep on record with the local law enforcement agency a complete copy of the current rates to be charged for such services and post at the storage site an identical rate schedule and any written contracts with property owners, lessees, or persons in control of property which authorize such person or firm to remove vehicles or vessels as provided in this section.
7. Any person or firm towing or removing any vehicles or vessels from private property without the consent of the owner or other legally authorized person in control or custody of the vehicles or vessels shall, on any trucks, wreckers as defined in s. 713.78(1), or other vehicles used in the towing or removal, have the name, address, and telephone number of the company performing such service clearly printed in contrasting colors on the driver and passenger sides of the vehicle. The name shall be in at least 3-inch permanently affixed letters, and the address and telephone number shall be in at least 1-inch permanently affixed letters.
8. Vehicle entry for the purpose of removing the vehicle or vessel shall be allowed with reasonable care on the part of the person or firm towing the vehicle or vessel. Such person or firm shall be liable for any damage occasioned to the vehicle or vessel if such entry is not in accordance with the standard of reasonable care.
9. When a vehicle or vessel has been towed or removed pursuant to this section, it must be released to its owner or person in control or custody within 1 hour after requested. Any vehicle or vessel owner or person in control or custody has the right to inspect the vehicle or vessel before accepting its return, and no release or waiver of any kind which would release the person or firm towing the vehicle or vessel from liability for damages noted by the owner or person in control or custody at the time of the redemption may be required from any vehicle or vessel owner or person in control or custody as a condition of release of the vehicle or vessel to its owner or person in control or custody. A detailed receipt showing the legal name of the company or person towing or removing the vehicle or vessel must be given to the person paying towing or storage charges at the time of payment, whether requested or not.
(b) These requirements are minimum standards and do not preclude enactment of additional regulations by any municipality or county including the right to regulate rates when vehicles or vessels are towed from private property.
(3) This section does not apply to law enforcement, firefighting, rescue squad, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles or vessels that are marked as such or to property owned by any governmental entity.
(4) When a person improperly causes a vehicle or vessel to be removed, such person shall be liable to the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vessel for the cost of removal, transportation, and storage; any damages resulting from the removal, transportation, or storage of the vehicle or vessel; attorney’s fees; and court costs.
(5)(a) Any person who violates subparagraph (2)(a)2. or subparagraph (2)(a)6. commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(b) Any person who violates subparagraph (2)(a)1., subparagraph (2)(a)3., subparagraph (2)(a)4., subparagraph (2)(a)7., or subparagraph (2)(a)9. commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
History.—s. 1, ch. 76-83; s. 221, ch. 77-104; s. 2, ch. 79-206; s. 2, ch. 79-271; s. 2, ch. 79-410; s. 1, ch. 83-330; s. 51, ch. 87-198; s. 3, ch. 88-240; s. 9, ch. 90-283; s. 839, ch. 97-102; s. 18, ch. 2001-64; s. 5, ch. 2005-137; s. 11, ch. 2006-172; s. 10, ch. 2014-70; s. 7, ch. 2020-174; s. 6, ch. 2024-27.
1715.075 Vehicles parked on private property; rules and rates authorized.—
(1)(a) The owner or operator of a private property used for motor vehicle parking may establish rules and rates that govern private persons parking motor vehicles on such private property. Such rules and rates may include parking charges for violating the property owner’s or operator’s rules. The owner or operator of a private property used for motor vehicle parking must place signage that is legible and clearly visible to persons entering the area used for motor vehicle parking. The signage must state that the property is not operated by a governmental entity, list the rates for parking charges for violating the rules of the property owner or operator, provide a working phone number and an e-mail address to receive inquiries and complaints, and provide notice of the grace period and appeal process provided by this section. Such signage may be regulated by the county or municipality in which the property is located.
(b) An invoice for parking charges issued under this section must include the following statement in uppercase type:
THIS INVOICE IS PRIVATELY ISSUED, IS NOT ISSUED BY A GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, AND IS NOT SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PENALTIES.

(c) An invoice for parking charges issued for violating the rules of the property owner or operator of a private property used for motor vehicle parking must be placed on the motor vehicle in a prominent location or mailed within 5 business days of the violation. The owner or operator of a private property used for motor vehicle parking may not assess a late fee until expiration of the 15-day period following the denial of any appeal filed pursuant to paragraph (d) or for a period of at least 30 days after the invoice is placed on the motor vehicle or the postmarked date of the mailing, whichever is later.
(d) An invoice for parking charges issued under this section must include a method to dispute and appeal the invoice by a party who believes they have received the invoice in error. Such dispute must be filed with the parking lot owner or operator within 15 days after the invoice is placed on the motor vehicle or after the postmarked date of the mailing of the invoice. The parking lot owner or operator shall have 5 business days in which to render a decision on the filed dispute. The party may then, within 10 days after receipt of the owner’s or operator’s decision, appeal such decision. The appeal must be determined by a neutral third-party adjudicator with the authority to review and approve or deny the appeal. If the appeal is approved, the invoice shall be dismissed. If the appeal is denied, the party shall pay the original invoice within 15 days after the decision of the adjudicator.
(e) Paragraphs (c) and (d) do not apply to an owner or operator of a theme park or entertainment complex as defined in s. 509.013(9).
(2) A county or municipality may not enact an ordinance or a regulation restricting or prohibiting a right of a private property owner or operator established under subsection (1). Any such ordinance or regulation is a violation of this section and is null and void.
(3) The owner or operator of a private property used for motor vehicle parking must allow a grace period of at least 15 minutes upon entrance to such property before any parking charges may be incurred, provided that the motor vehicle does not park during that time.
(4) This section does not apply to an owner or operator of a lodging park, mobile home park, or recreational vehicle park as those terms are defined in s. 513.01, provided that the terms of tenancy and parking within such park are established by rules and regulations of the park pursuant to s. 513.117 or within a rental agreement between the owner or operator of the park and the operator of the motor vehicle.
(5) An owner or operator of a private property used for motor vehicle parking may not sell, offer to sell, or transfer to another person for sale any personal information obtained from a party using the private property for parking services.
History.—s. 4, ch. 2022-171; s. 1, ch. 2024-64.
1Note.—Section 6, ch. 2022-171, provides that “[a] person with an interest in land which may potentially be extinguished by this act, and whose interest has not been extinguished before July 1, 2022, must file a notice pursuant to s. 712.06, Florida Statutes, by July 1, 2023, to preserve such interest. Any county as defined in s. 125.011(1), Florida Statutes, with an interest in land which may potentially be extinguished by this act, and whose interest has not been extinguished before July 1, 2022, must file a notice pursuant to s. 712.06, Florida Statutes, by July 1, 2025, to preserve such interest.”
715.10 Disposition of Personal Property Landlord and Tenant Act; short title.—Sections 715.10-715.111 may be cited as the “Disposition of Personal Property Landlord and Tenant Act.”
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151.
715.101 Application of ss. 715.10-715.111.—
(1) Sections 715.10-715.111 apply to all tenancies to which part I or part II of chapter 83 are applicable, and to tenancies after a writ of possession has been issued pursuant to s. 723.062.
(2) Sections 715.10-715.111 provide an optional procedure for the disposition of personal property which remains on the premises after a tenancy has terminated or expired and the premises have been vacated by the tenant through eviction, surrender, abandonment, or otherwise.
(3) Sections 715.10-715.111 do not apply to property which exists for the purpose of providing utility services and is owned by a utility, whether or not such property is actually in operation to provide such utility services.
(4) If the requirements of ss. 715.10-715.111 are not satisfied, nothing in ss. 715.10-715.111 affects the rights and liabilities of the landlord, the former tenant, or any other person.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 4, ch. 2003-263.
715.102 Definitions of terms used in ss. 715.10-715.111.—As used in ss. 715.10-715.111, unless some other meaning is clearly indicated, the term:
(1) “Landlord” means any operator, keeper, lessor, or sublessor of furnished or unfurnished premises for rent, or her or his agent or successor-in-interest.
(2) “Owner” means any person other than the landlord who has any right, title, or interest in personal property.
(3) “Premises” includes any common areas associated therewith.
(4) “Reasonable belief” means the actual knowledge or belief a prudent person should have without making an investigation, including any investigation of public records; except that, when the landlord has specific information indicating that such an investigation would more probably than not reveal pertinent information and the cost of such an investigation would be reasonable in relation to the probable value of the personal property involved, the term “reasonable belief” includes the actual knowledge or belief a prudent person would have if such an investigation were made.
(5) “Tenant” includes any paying guest, lessee, or sublessee of any premises for rent, whether a dwelling unit or not.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 840, ch. 97-102.
715.103 Lost property.—Personal property which the landlord reasonably believes to have been lost shall be disposed of as otherwise provided by law. However, if the appropriate law enforcement agency or other government agency refuses to accept custody of property pursuant to chapter 705, the landlord may dispose of the property pursuant to ss. 715.10-715.111. The landlord is not liable to the owner of the property if she or he complies with this section and the other provisions of ss. 715.10-715.111.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 841, ch. 97-102.
715.104 Notification of former tenant of personal property remaining on premises after tenancy has terminated.—
(1) When personal property remains on the premises after a tenancy has terminated or expired and the premises have been vacated by the tenant, through eviction or otherwise, the landlord shall give written notice to such tenant and to any other person the landlord reasonably believes to be the owner of the property.
(2) The notice shall describe the property in a manner reasonably adequate to permit the owner of the property to identify it. The notice may describe all or a portion of the property, but the limitation of liability provided by s. 715.11 does not protect the landlord from any liability arising from the disposition of property not described in the notice, except that a trunk, valise, box, or other container which is locked, fastened, or tied in a manner which deters immediate access to its contents may be described as such without describing its contents. The notice shall advise the person to be notified that reasonable costs of storage may be charged before the property is returned, and the notice shall state where the property may be claimed and the date before which the claim must be made. The date specified in the notice shall be a date not fewer than 10 days after the notice is personally delivered or, if mailed, not fewer than 15 days after the notice is deposited in the mail.
(3) The notice shall be personally delivered or sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the person to be notified at her or his last known address and, if there is reason to believe that the notice sent to that address will not be received by that person, also delivered or sent to such other address, if any, known to the landlord where such person may reasonably be expected to receive the notice.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 842, ch. 97-102.
715.105 Form of notice concerning abandoned property to former tenant.—
(1) A notice to the former tenant which is in substantially the following form satisfies the requirements of s. 715.104:
Notice of Right to Reclaim Abandoned Property

To:   (Name of former tenant)  

      (Address of former tenant)  

When you vacated the premises at   (address of premises, including room or apartment number, if any)  , the following personal property remained:   (insert description of personal property)  .

You may claim this property at   (address where property may be claimed)  .

Unless you pay the reasonable costs of storage and advertising, if any, for all the above-described property and take possession of the property which you claim, not later than   (insert date not fewer than 10 days after notice is personally delivered or, if mailed, not fewer than 15 days after notice is deposited in the mail)  , this property may be disposed of pursuant to s. 715.109.

  (Insert here the statement required by subsection (2))  

Dated:        (Signature of landlord)  

  (Type or print name of landlord)  

  (Telephone number)  

  (Address)  

(2) The notice set forth in subsection (1) shall also contain one of the following statements:
(a) “If you fail to reclaim the property, it will be sold at a public sale after notice of the sale has been given by publication. You have the right to bid on the property at this sale. After the property is sold and the costs of storage, advertising, and sale are deducted, the remaining money will be paid over to the county. You may claim the remaining money at any time within 1 year after the county receives the money.”
(b) “Because this property is believed to be worth less than $500, it may be kept, sold, or destroyed without further notice if you fail to reclaim it within the time indicated above.”
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 3, ch. 2001-179.
715.106 Form of notice concerning abandoned property to owner other than former tenant.—
(1) A notice which is in substantially the following form given to a person who is not the former tenant and whom the landlord reasonably believes to be the owner of any of the abandoned personal property satisfies the requirements of s. 715.104:
Notice of Right to Reclaim Abandoned Property

To:   (Name)  

  (Address)  

When   (name of former tenant)   vacated the premises at   (address of premises, including room or apartment number, if any)  , the following personal property remained:   (insert description of personal property)  .

If you own any of this property, you may claim it at   (address where property may be claimed)  . Unless you pay the reasonable costs of storage and advertising, if any, and take possession of the property to which you are entitled, not later than   (insert date not fewer than 10 days after notice is personally delivered or, if mailed, not fewer than 15 days after notice is deposited in the mail)  , this property may be disposed of pursuant to s. 715.109.

(Insert here the statement required by subsection (2))

Dated:        (Signature of landlord)  

  (Type or print name of landlord)  

  (Telephone number)  

  (Address)  

(2) The notice set forth in subsection (1) shall also contain one of the following statements:
(a) “If you fail to reclaim the property, it will be sold at a public sale after notice of the sale has been given by publication. You have the right to bid on the property at this sale. After the property is sold and the costs of storage, advertising, and sale are deducted, the remaining money will be paid over to the county. You may claim the remaining money at any time within 1 year after the county receives the money.”
(b) “Because this property is believed to be worth less than $500, it may be kept, sold, or destroyed without further notice if you fail to reclaim it within the time indicated above.”
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 4, ch. 2001-179.
715.107 Storage of abandoned property.—The personal property described in the notice either shall be left on the vacated premises or be stored by the landlord in a place of safekeeping until the landlord either releases the property pursuant to s. 715.108 or disposes of the property pursuant to s. 715.109. The landlord shall exercise reasonable care in storing the property, but she or he is not liable to the tenant or any other owner for any loss unless caused by the landlord’s deliberate or negligent act.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 843, ch. 97-102.
715.108 Release of personal property.—
(1) The personal property described in the notice shall be released by the landlord to the former tenant or, at the landlord’s option, to any person reasonably believed by the landlord to be its owner, if such tenant or other person pays the reasonable costs of storage and advertising and takes possession of the property not later than the date specified in the notice for taking possession.
(2) Where personal property is not released pursuant to subsection (1) and the notice has stated that the personal property will be sold at a public sale, the landlord shall release the personal property to the former tenant if she or he claims it prior to the time it is sold and pays the reasonable costs of storage, advertising, and sale incurred prior to the time the property is withdrawn from sale.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 844, ch. 97-102.
715.109 Sale or disposition of abandoned property.—
(1) If the personal property described in the notice is not released pursuant to s. 715.108, it shall be sold at public sale by competitive bidding. However, if the landlord reasonably believes that the total resale value of the property not released is less than $500, she or he may retain such property for her or his own use or dispose of it in any manner she or he chooses. Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the landlord or tenant from bidding on the property at the public sale. The successful bidder’s title is subject to ownership rights, liens, and security interests which have priority by law.
(2) Notice of the time and place of the public sale shall be given by an advertisement of the sale published once a week for 2 consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation where the sale is to be held. The sale must be held at the nearest suitable place to that where the personal property is held or stored. The advertisement must include a description of the goods, the name of the former tenant, and the time and place of the sale. The sale must take place at least 10 days after the first publication. If there is no newspaper of general circulation where the sale is to be held, the advertisement must be posted at least 10 days before the sale in not less than six conspicuous places in the neighborhood of the proposed sale. The last publication shall be at least 5 days before the sale is to be held. Notice of sale may be published before the last of the dates specified for taking possession of the property in any notice given pursuant to s. 715.104.
(3) The notice of the sale shall describe the property to be sold in a manner reasonably adequate to permit the owner of the property to identify it. The notice may describe all or a portion of the property, but the limitation of liability provided by s. 715.11 does not protect the landlord from any liability arising from the disposition of property not described in the notice, except that a trunk, valise, box, or other container which is locked, fastened, or tied in a manner which deters immediate access to its contents may be described as such without describing its contents.
(4) After deduction of the costs of storage, advertising, and sale, any balance of the proceeds of the sale which is not claimed by the former tenant or an owner other than such tenant shall be paid into the treasury of the county in which the sale took place not later than 30 days after the date of sale. The former tenant or other owner or other person having interest in the funds may claim the balance within 1 year from the date of payment to the county by making application to the county treasurer or other official designated by the county. If the county pays the balance or any part thereof to a claimant, neither the county nor any officer or employee thereof is liable to any other claimant as to the amount paid.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 845, ch. 97-102; s. 5, ch. 2001-179.
715.11 Nonliability of landlord after disposition of property.—
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of s. 715.101, after the landlord releases to the former tenant property which remains on the premises after a tenancy is terminated, the landlord is not liable with respect to that property to any person.
(2) After the landlord releases property pursuant to s. 715.108 to a person who is not the former tenant and who is reasonably believed by the landlord to be the owner of the property, the landlord is not liable with respect to that property to:
(a) Any person to whom notice was given pursuant to s. 715.104; or
(b) Any person to whom notice was not given pursuant to s. 715.104 unless such person proves that, prior to releasing the property, the landlord believed or reasonably should have believed that such person had an interest in the property and also that the landlord knew or should have known upon reasonable investigation the address of such person.
(3) Where property is disposed of pursuant to s. 715.109, the landlord is not liable with respect to that property to:
(a) Any person to whom notice was given pursuant to s. 715.104; or
(b) Any person to whom notice was not given pursuant to s. 715.104 unless such person proves that, prior to disposing of the property pursuant to s. 715.109, the landlord believed or reasonably should have believed that such person had an interest in the property and also that the landlord knew or should have known upon reasonable investigation the address of such person.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151.
715.111 Assessing costs of storage.—
(1) Costs of storage for which payment may be required under ss. 715.10-715.111 shall be assessed in the following manner:
(a) When a former tenant claims property pursuant to s. 715.108, she or he may be required to pay the reasonable costs of storage for all the personal property remaining on the premises at the termination of the tenancy, which costs are unpaid at the time the claim is made.
(b) When an owner other than the former tenant claims property pursuant to s. 715.108, she or he may be required to pay the reasonable costs of storage for only the property in which she or he claims an interest.
(2) In determining the costs to be assessed under subsection (1), the landlord may not charge more than one person for the same costs.
(3) If the landlord stores the personal property on the premises, the costs of storage shall be the fair rental value of the space reasonably required for such storage for the term of the storage.
History.—s. 11, ch. 83-151; s. 846, ch. 97-102.
715.12 Construction Contract Prompt Payment Law.—
(1) This section may be cited as the “Construction Contract Prompt Payment Law.”
(2) This section applies only to written contracts to improve real property entered into after December 31, 1992, and for which a construction lien is authorized under part I of chapter 713.
(3) The terms used in this section have the same definitions as the terms defined in s. 713.01. As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Obligor” means an owner, contractor, subcontractor, or sub-subcontractor who has an obligation to make payments under a contract that is subject to this section.
(b) “Obligee” means a contractor, subcontractor, sub-subcontractor, or materialman who is entitled to receive payments under a contract that is subject to this section.
(c) “Chain of contracts” means the contracts between the owner and the contractor, the contractor and any subcontractor or materialman, the subcontractor and any sub-subcontractor or materialman, and the sub-subcontractor and any materialman.
(4) An obligor must pay an obligee with whom the obligor has a contract when all of the following events have occurred:
(a) The obligee is entitled to a payment at the time and under the terms specified in the contract between the obligor and the obligee, and the obligee has furnished the obligor with a written request for payment; and
(b) The obligor, except an owner, has been paid for the obligee’s labor, services, or materials described in the obligee’s request for payment by the person immediately above the obligor in the chain of contracts; and
(c) The obligee has furnished the obligor with all affidavits or waivers required for the owner to make proper payments under s. 713.06.
(5)(a) Any payment due under the provisions of subsection (4), excluding any amounts withheld pursuant to subsection (7), shall bear interest at the rate specified in s. 55.03 plus an additional 12 percent per annum, computed beginning on the 14th day after payment is due pursuant to subsection (4).
(b) If the request for payment is incomplete or contains an error, the obligor has 14 days within which to return the request for payment to the obligee for completion or correction. The obligor must specify in writing the reasons for the return of the request for payment. If the obligor does not return the request for payment, together with the specified reasons within the time provided in paragraph (a), the obligor must pay interest as provided in paragraph (a). If the obligor does return the request for payment within the time provided in paragraph (a), the time period for computing interest begins to run on the 14th day after the request for payment is completed or corrected and payment is otherwise due pursuant to subsection (4).
(6)(a) The right to receive interest on a payment under this section is not an exclusive remedy. This section does not modify the remedies available to any person under the terms of a contract or under any other statute. This section does not modify the rights of any person to recover prejudgment interest awarded to the prevailing party in any civil action or arbitration case. During the period that interest accrues under this section, the interest rate shall be the rate specified in s. 55.03 plus an additional 12 percent per annum or the rate specified in the contract, whichever is greater. A person shall not be entitled to receive both the contract interest and the statutory interest specified in this section.
(b) This section does not create a separate cause of action other than for the collection of interest due pursuant to subsection (5).
(c) If an obligor pays an amount less than the full amount due under the contract between the obligor and the obligee, the obligor may designate the portion of the labor, services, or materials to which the payment applies. In the absence of such a designation by the obligor, the obligee may apply the payment in any manner the obligee deems appropriate. This paragraph does not modify the obligation to make or demand a designation under the provisions of s. 713.14.
(d) An obligee may not waive the right to receive interest before a payment is due under a contract subject to this section. An obligee may waive the interest due on any late payment on or after the date the payment is due under subsection (4).
(e) Unless the contract specifically provides to the contrary, a dispute between an obligor and obligee does not permit the obligor to withhold payment from the obligee or from any other obligee for labor, services, or materials provided to the obligor and which are not subject to or affected by the dispute.
(7)(a) An owner and a contractor may agree to a provision that allows the owner to withhold a portion of each progress payment until substantial completion of the entire project. The owner shall pay the contractor the balance of the contract price, including the amounts withheld from the progress payments, within 14 days after any of the following events occur.
1. Pursuant to the terms of the contract, an architect or engineer certifies that the project is substantially complete and, within the time provided in the contract between the owner and the contractor, the owner submits a written punchlist to the contractor and the contractor substantially completes all of the items on the punchlist.
2. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project, and within the time provided in the contract between the owner and the contractor, the owner submits a written punchlist to the contractor and the contractor substantially completes all of the items on the punchlist.
3. The owner or a tenant of the owner takes possession of the construction project and, within the time provided in the contract between the owner and the contractor, the owner submits a written punchlist to the contractor and the contractor substantially completes all of the items on the punchlist.
Any funds retained by the owner beyond the time period specified in this subsection shall accrue interest at the rate specified in subsection (5), computed from the date the payment is due to the date the payment is received by the contractor. If the contract between the owner and the contractor does not provide a time period for the owner to submit a written punchlist to the contractor, the time period shall be 15 days from the issuance of the certificate of substantial completion, the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or the date the owner or the owner’s tenant takes possession of the project, whichever first occurs. If no written punchlist is given to the contractor within the time provided in this subsection, interest begins to accrue 14 days after the issuance of the certificate of substantial completion, the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or the date the owner or the owner’s tenant takes possession of the project, whichever first occurs. For construction projects that are to be built in phases, this subsection applies to each phase of the total project. The contract between the owner and the contractor may specify a shorter time period for disbursing all or any portion of the final payment and the retainage.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (a), an obligor and obligee may agree to a provision that allows the obligor to withhold a portion of each progress payment until completion of the entire project. The amounts withheld shall bear interest 14 days after payment of such amounts are due under the terms of the contract between the obligor and obligee and the other requirements of subsection (4) have been satisfied.
(c) An obligee may, from time to time, withdraw all or any portion of the amount retained from progress payments upon depositing with the obligor:
1. United States Treasury bonds, United States Treasury notes, United States Treasury certificates of indebtedness, or United States Treasury bills;
2. Bonds or notes of the State of Florida; or
3. Certificates of deposit, within the insured limits, from a state or national bank or state or federal savings and loan association authorized to do business in this state.
Amounts may not be withdrawn in excess of the market value of the securities listed in subparagraphs 1., 2., and 3. at the time of such withdrawal or in excess of the par value of such securities, whichever is less. The obligee shall execute and deliver all documents reasonably required to allow the obligor to document the transfer and the obligee shall pay any recording or registration costs incurred by the obligor in connection with the transfer. The obligor shall pay the obligee any interest or income earned on the securities so deposited within 30 days after the date such interest or income is received by the obligor. If the deposit is in the form of coupon bonds, the obligor shall deliver each coupon to the obligee within 30 days after the date the coupon matures. An obligee may withdraw funds retained from progress payments only to the extent the obligor has withdrawn such funds for the obligee’s labor, services, or materials from the person immediately above the obligor in the chain of contracts.

History.—s. 1, ch. 92-286; s. 32, ch. 93-166; s. 7, ch. 2021-124.