The 2024 Florida Statutes

Title XLVI
CRIMES

Chapter 784
ASSAULT; BATTERY; CULPABLE NEGLIGENCE


----

TABLE OF CONTENTS:

784.011 Assault.
784.021 Aggravated assault.
784.03 Battery; felony battery.
784.031 Battery by strangulation.
784.041 Felony battery; domestic battery by strangulation.
784.045 Aggravated battery.
784.046 Action by victim of repeat violence, sexual violence, or dating violence for protective injunction; dating violence investigations, notice to victims, and reporting; pretrial release violations; public records exemption.
784.047 Penalties for violating protective injunction against violators.
784.048 Stalking; definitions; penalties.
784.0485 Stalking; injunction; powers and duties of court and clerk; petition; notice and hearing; temporary injunction; issuance of injunction; statewide verification system; enforcement.
784.0487 Violation of an injunction for protection against stalking or cyberstalking.
784.049 Sexual cyberharassment.
784.0493 Harassment or intimidation based on religious or ethnic heritage.
784.0495 Mob intimidation.
784.05 Culpable negligence.
784.062 Misuse of laser lighting devices.
784.07 Assault or battery of law enforcement officers and other specified personnel; reclassification of offenses; minimum sentences.
784.071 Assault or battery on a law enforcement officer; missing while in line of duty; blue alert.
784.074 Assault or battery on sexually violent predators detention or commitment facility staff; reclassification of offenses.
784.075 Battery on detention or commitment facility staff or a juvenile probation officer.
784.076 Battery on health services personnel.
784.078 Battery of facility employee by throwing, tossing, or expelling certain fluids or materials.
784.08 Assault or battery on persons 65 years of age or older; reclassification of offenses; minimum sentence.
784.081 Assault or battery on specified officials or employees; reclassification of offenses.
784.082 Assault or battery by a person who is being detained in a prison, jail, or other detention facility upon visitor or other detainee; reclassification of offenses.
784.083 Assault or battery on code inspectors.
784.085 Battery of child by throwing, tossing, projecting, or expelling certain fluids or materials.
784.086 Reproductive battery.


-----

BELOW IS: 784.0485 - 784.086 


784.0485 Stalking; injunction; powers and duties of court and clerk; petition; notice and hearing; temporary injunction; issuance of injunction; statewide verification system; enforcement.—
(1) There is created a cause of action for an injunction for protection against stalking. For the purposes of injunctions for protection against stalking under this section, the offense of stalking shall include the offense of cyberstalking.
(a) A person who is the victim of stalking or the parent or legal guardian of a minor child who is living at home who seeks an injunction for protection against stalking on behalf of the minor child has standing in the circuit court to file a verified petition for an injunction for protection against stalking.
(b) The cause of action for an injunction for protection may be sought regardless of whether any other cause of action is currently pending between the parties. However, the pendency of any such cause of action shall be alleged in the petition.
(c) The cause of action for an injunction may be sought by any affected person.
(d) The cause of action for an injunction does not require either party to be represented by an attorney.
(e) The court may not issue mutual orders of protection; however, the court is not precluded from issuing separate injunctions for protection against stalking if each party has complied with this section. Compliance with this section may not be waived.
(f) Notwithstanding chapter 47, a petition for an injunction for protection against stalking may be filed in the circuit where the petitioner currently or temporarily resides, where the respondent resides, or where the stalking occurred. There is no minimum requirement of residency to petition for an injunction for protection.
(2)(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the clerk of court may not assess a filing fee to file a petition for protection against stalking. However, subject to legislative appropriation, the clerk of the circuit court may, on a quarterly basis, submit to the Office of the State Courts Administrator a certified request for reimbursement for petitions for protection against stalking issued by the court, at the rate of $40 per petition. The request for reimbursement shall be submitted in the form and manner prescribed by the Office of the State Courts Administrator. From this reimbursement, the clerk shall pay any law enforcement agency serving the injunction the fee requested by the law enforcement agency; however, this fee may not exceed $20.
(b) A bond is not required by the court for the entry of an injunction.
(c)1. The clerk of the court shall assist petitioners in seeking both injunctions for protection against stalking and enforcement of a violation thereof as specified in this section.
2. All offices of the clerk of the court shall provide simplified petition forms for the injunction and any modifications to and the enforcement thereof, including instructions for completion.
3. The clerk of the court shall ensure the petitioner’s privacy to the extent practicable while completing the forms for an injunction for protection against stalking.
4. The clerk of the court shall provide a petitioner with a minimum of two certified copies of the order of injunction, one of which is serviceable and will inform the petitioner of the process for service and enforcement.
5. The clerk of the court and appropriate staff in each county shall receive training in the effective assistance of petitioners as provided or approved by the Florida Association of Court Clerks and Comptrollers.
6. The clerk of the court in each county shall make available informational brochures on stalking when such a brochure is provided by the local certified domestic violence center or certified rape crisis center.
7. The clerk of the court in each county shall distribute a statewide uniform informational brochure to petitioners at the time of filing for an injunction for protection against stalking when such brochures become available. The brochure must include information about the effect of giving the court false information.
(3)(a) The verified petition shall allege the existence of such stalking and shall include the specific facts and circumstances for which relief is sought.
(b) The verified petition shall be in substantially the following form:
PETITION FOR INJUNCTION
FOR PROTECTION AGAINST STALKING

The undersigned petitioner   (name)   declares under penalties of perjury that the following statements are true:

1. Petitioner resides at:   (address)  

(Petitioner may furnish the address to the court in a separate confidential filing if, for safety reasons, the petitioner requires the location of the current residence to be confidential.)

2. Respondent resides at:   (last known address)  

3. Respondent’s last known place of employment:   (name of business and address)  

4. Physical description of respondent:  

5. Race:  

6. Sex:  

7. Date of birth:  

8. Height:  

9. Weight:  

10. Eye color:  

11. Hair color:  

12. Distinguishing marks or scars:  

13. Aliases of respondent:  

(c) The petitioner shall describe any other cause of action currently pending between the petitioner and respondent. The petitioner shall also describe any previous attempt by the petitioner to obtain an injunction for protection against stalking in this or any other circuit, and the result of that attempt. (Case numbers should be included, if available.)
(d) The petition must provide space for the petitioner to specifically allege that he or she is a victim of stalking because respondent has:
(Mark all sections that apply and describe in the spaces below the incidents of stalking specifying when and where they occurred, including, but not limited to, locations such as a home, school, or place of employment.)

  Committed stalking.

  Previously threatened, harassed, stalked, cyberstalked, or physically abused the petitioner.

  Threatened to harm the petitioner or family members or individuals closely associated with the petitioner.

  Intentionally injured or killed a family pet.

  Used, or threatened to use, against the petitioner any weapons such as guns or knives.

  A criminal history involving violence or the threat of violence, if known.

  Another order of protection issued against him or her previously or from another jurisdiction, if known.

  Destroyed personal property, including, but not limited to, telephones or other communication equipment, clothing, or other items belonging to the petitioner.

(e) The petitioner seeks an injunction:
(Mark appropriate section or sections.)

  Immediately restraining the respondent from committing any acts of stalking.

  Restraining the respondent from committing any acts of stalking.

  Providing any terms the court deems necessary for the protection of a victim of stalking, including any injunctions or directives to law enforcement agencies.

(f) Every petition for an injunction against stalking must contain, directly above the signature line, a statement in all capital letters and bold type not smaller than the surrounding text, as follows:
UNDER PENALTIES OF PERJURY, I DECLARE THAT I HAVE READ THE FOREGOING DOCUMENT AND THAT THE FACTS STATED IN IT ARE TRUE. I UNDERSTAND THAT THE STATEMENTS MADE IN THIS PETITION ARE BEING MADE UNDER PENALTIES OF PERJURY, PUNISHABLE AS PROVIDED IN SECTION 92.525, FLORIDA STATUTES.

  (initials)  

(4) Upon the filing of the petition, the court shall set a hearing to be held at the earliest possible time. The respondent shall be personally served with a copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and temporary injunction, if any, before the hearing.
(5)(a) If it appears to the court that stalking exists, the court may grant a temporary injunction ex parte, pending a full hearing, and may grant such relief as the court deems proper, including an injunction restraining the respondent from committing any act of stalking.
(b) Except as provided in s. 90.204, in a hearing ex parte for the purpose of obtaining such ex parte temporary injunction, evidence other than verified pleadings or affidavits may not be used as evidence, unless the respondent appears at the hearing or has received reasonable notice of the hearing. A denial of a petition for an ex parte injunction shall be by written order noting the legal grounds for denial. If the only ground for denial is no appearance of an immediate and present danger of stalking, the court shall set a full hearing on the petition for injunction with notice at the earliest possible time. This paragraph does not affect a petitioner’s right to promptly amend any petition, or otherwise be heard in person on any petition consistent with the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure.
(c) Any such ex parte temporary injunction is effective for a fixed period not to exceed 15 days. A full hearing, as provided in this section, shall be set for a date no later than the date when the temporary injunction ceases to be effective. The court may grant a continuance of the hearing before or during a hearing for good cause shown by any party, which shall include a continuance to obtain service of process. An injunction shall be extended if necessary to remain in full force and effect during any period of continuance.
(6)(a) Upon notice and hearing, when it appears to the court that the petitioner is the victim of stalking, the court may grant such relief as the court deems proper, including an injunction:
1. Restraining the respondent from committing any act of stalking.
2. Ordering the respondent to participate in treatment, intervention, or counseling services to be paid for by the respondent.
3. Referring a petitioner to appropriate services. The court may provide the petitioner with a list of certified domestic violence centers, certified rape crisis centers, and other appropriate referrals in the circuit which the petitioner may contact.
4. Ordering such other relief as the court deems necessary for the protection of a victim of stalking, including injunctions or directives to law enforcement agencies, as provided in this section.
(b) The terms of an injunction restraining the respondent under subparagraph (a)1. or ordering other relief for the protection of the victim under subparagraph (a)4. shall remain in effect until modified or dissolved. Either party may move at any time to modify or dissolve the injunction. Specific allegations are not required. Such relief may be granted in addition to other civil or criminal remedies.
(c) A temporary or final judgment on injunction for protection against stalking entered pursuant to this section shall, on its face, indicate:
1. That the injunction is valid and enforceable in all counties of this state.
2. That law enforcement officers may use their arrest powers pursuant to s. 901.15(6) to enforce the terms of the injunction.
3. That the court has jurisdiction over the parties and matter under the laws of this state and that reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard was given to the person against whom the order is sought sufficient to protect that person’s right to due process.
4. The date that the respondent was served with the temporary or final order, if obtainable.
(d) The fact that a separate order of protection is granted to each opposing party is not legally sufficient to deny any remedy to either party or to prove that the parties are equally at fault or equally endangered.
(e) A final judgment on an injunction for protection against stalking entered pursuant to this section must, on its face, provide that it is a violation of s. 790.233 and a misdemeanor of the first degree for the respondent to have in his or her care, custody, possession, or control any firearm or ammunition.
(f) All proceedings under this subsection shall be recorded. Recording may be by electronic means as provided by the Rules of Judicial Administration.
(7) The court shall allow an advocate from a state attorney’s office, a law enforcement agency, a certified rape crisis center, or a certified domestic violence center who is registered under s. 39.905 to be present with the petitioner or respondent during any court proceedings or hearings related to the injunction for protection if the petitioner or respondent has made such a request and the advocate is able to be present.
(8)(a)1. Within 24 hours after the court issues an injunction for protection against stalking, the clerk of the court shall electronically transmit a copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and temporary injunction, if any, to the sheriff or a law enforcement agency of the county where the respondent resides or can be found, who shall serve it upon the respondent as soon thereafter as possible on any day of the week and at any time of the day or night. An electronic copy of an injunction must be certified by the clerk of the court, and the electronic copy must be served in the same manner as a certified copy. Upon receiving an electronic copy of the injunction, the sheriff must verify receipt with the sender before attempting to serve it on the respondent. In addition, if the sheriff is in possession of an injunction for protection that has been certified by the clerk of the court, the sheriff may electronically transmit a copy of that injunction to a law enforcement officer who shall serve it in the same manner as a certified copy. The clerk of the court shall furnish to the sheriff such information concerning the respondent’s physical description and location as is required by the Department of Law Enforcement to comply with the verification procedures set forth in this section. Notwithstanding any other law, the chief judge of each circuit, in consultation with the appropriate sheriff, may authorize a law enforcement agency within the jurisdiction to effect service. A law enforcement agency serving injunctions pursuant to this section must use service and verification procedures consistent with those of the sheriff.
2. If an injunction is issued and the petitioner requests the assistance of a law enforcement agency, the court may order that an officer from the appropriate law enforcement agency accompany the petitioner to assist in the execution or service of the injunction. A law enforcement officer must accept a copy of an injunction for protection against stalking, certified by the clerk of the court, from the petitioner and immediately serve it upon a respondent who has been located but not yet served.
3. An order issued, changed, continued, extended, or vacated subsequent to the original service of documents enumerated under subparagraph 1. must be certified by the clerk of the court and delivered to the parties at the time of the entry of the order. The parties may acknowledge receipt of such order in writing on the face of the original order. If a party fails or refuses to acknowledge the receipt of a certified copy of an order, the clerk shall note on the original order that service was effected. If delivery at the hearing is not possible, the clerk shall mail certified copies of the order to the parties at the last known address of each party. Service by mail is complete upon mailing. When an order is served pursuant to this subsection, the clerk shall prepare a written certification to be placed in the court file specifying the time, date, and method of service and shall notify the sheriff.
4. If the respondent has been served previously with a temporary injunction and has failed to appear at the initial hearing on the temporary injunction, any subsequent petition for injunction seeking an extension of time may be served on the respondent by the clerk of the court by certified mail in lieu of personal service by a law enforcement officer.
(b)1. Within 24 hours after the court issues an injunction for protection against stalking or changes, continues, extends, or vacates an injunction for protection against stalking, the clerk of the court must electronically transmit a certified copy of the injunction for service to the sheriff having jurisdiction over the residence of the petitioner. The injunction must be served in accordance with this subsection.
2. Within 24 hours after service of process of an injunction for protection against stalking upon a respondent, the law enforcement officer must electronically transmit the written proof of service of process to the sheriff having jurisdiction over the residence of the petitioner.
3. Within 24 hours after the sheriff receives a certified copy of the injunction for protection against stalking, the sheriff must make information relating to the injunction available to other law enforcement agencies by electronically transmitting such information to the Department of Law Enforcement.
4. Within 24 hours after the sheriff or other law enforcement officer has made service upon the respondent and the sheriff has been so notified, the sheriff must make information relating to the service available to other law enforcement agencies by electronically transmitting such information to the Department of Law Enforcement.
5. Within 24 hours after an injunction for protection against stalking is vacated, terminated, or otherwise rendered no longer effective by ruling of the court, the clerk of the court must notify the sheriff receiving original notification of the injunction as provided in subparagraph 2. That agency shall, within 24 hours after receiving such notification from the clerk of the court, notify the Department of Law Enforcement of such action of the court.
(c) The petitioner may request a Hope Card under s. 741.311 after the court has issued a final order of protection.
(9)(a) The court may enforce a violation of an injunction for protection against stalking through a civil or criminal contempt proceeding, or the state attorney may prosecute it as a criminal violation under s. 784.0487. Any assessments or fines ordered by the court enforcing such an injunction shall be collected by the clerk of the court and transferred on a monthly basis to the State Treasury for deposit into the Domestic Violence Trust Fund.
(b) If the respondent is arrested by a law enforcement officer under s. 901.15(6) or for a violation of s. 784.0487, the respondent shall be held in custody until brought before the court as expeditiously as possible for the purpose of enforcing the injunction and for admittance to bail in accordance with chapter 903 and the applicable rules of criminal procedure, pending a hearing.
(10) The petitioner or the respondent may move the court to modify or dissolve an injunction at any time.
History.—s. 3, ch. 2012-153; s. 6, ch. 2014-35; s. 6, ch. 2016-187; s. 3, ch. 2022-173; s. 4, ch. 2024-109; s. 3, ch. 2024-152.
784.0487 Violation of an injunction for protection against stalking or cyberstalking.—
(1) If the injunction for protection against stalking or cyberstalking has been violated and the respondent has not been arrested, the petitioner may contact the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the violation is alleged to have occurred. The clerk shall assist the petitioner in preparing an affidavit in support of reporting the violation or directing the petitioner to the office operated by the court that has been designated by the chief judge of that circuit as the central intake point for violations of injunctions for protection where the petitioner can receive assistance in the preparation of the affidavit in support of the violation.
(2) The affidavit shall be immediately forwarded by the office assisting the petitioner to the state attorney of that circuit and to such judge as the chief judge determines to be the recipient of affidavits of violations of an injunction. If the affidavit alleges that a crime has been committed, the office assisting the petitioner shall also forward a copy of the petitioner’s affidavit to the appropriate law enforcement agency for investigation. No later than 20 days after receiving the initial report, the local law enforcement agency shall complete its investigation and forward a report to the state attorney. The policy adopted by the state attorney in each circuit under s. 741.2901(2) shall include a policy regarding intake of alleged violations of injunctions for protection against stalking or cyberstalking under this section. The intake shall be supervised by a state attorney who has been designated and assigned to handle stalking or cyberstalking cases. The state attorney shall determine within 30 working days whether his or her office will file criminal charges or prepare a motion for an order to show cause as to why the respondent should not be held in criminal contempt, or prepare both as alternative findings, or file notice that the case remains under investigation or is pending subject to some other action.
(3) If the court has knowledge that the petitioner or another person is in immediate danger if the court does not act before the decision of the state attorney to proceed, the court shall immediately issue an order of appointment of the state attorney to file a motion for an order to show cause as to why the respondent should not be held in contempt. If the court does not issue an order of appointment of the state attorney, it shall immediately notify the state attorney that the court is proceeding to enforce the violation through criminal contempt.
(4)(a) A person who willfully violates an injunction for protection against stalking or cyberstalking issued pursuant to s. 784.0485, or a foreign protection order accorded full faith and credit pursuant to s. 741.315, by:
1. Going to, or being within 500 feet of, the petitioner’s residence, school, place of employment, or a specified place frequented regularly by the petitioner and any named family members or individuals closely associated with the petitioner;
2. Committing an act of stalking against the petitioner;
3. Committing any other violation of the injunction through an intentional unlawful threat, word, or act to do violence to the petitioner;
4. Telephoning, contacting, or otherwise communicating with the petitioner, directly or indirectly, unless the injunction specifically allows indirect contact through a third party;
5. Knowingly and intentionally coming within 100 feet of the petitioner’s motor vehicle, whether or not that vehicle is occupied;
6. Defacing or destroying the petitioner’s personal property, including the petitioner’s motor vehicle; or
7. Refusing to surrender firearms or ammunition if ordered to do so by the court,
commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083, except as provided in paragraph (b).

(b) A person who has two or more prior convictions for violation of an injunction or foreign protection order, and who subsequently commits a violation of any injunction or foreign protection order against the same victim, commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “conviction” means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or a trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld or a plea of nolo contendere is entered.
(5) A person who suffers an injury or loss as a result of a violation of an injunction for protection against stalking or cyberstalking may be awarded economic damages for that injury or loss by the court issuing the injunction. Damages include costs and attorney fees for enforcement of the injunction.
History.—s. 4, ch. 2012-153; s. 3, ch. 2016-187.
784.049 Sexual cyberharassment.—
(1) The Legislature finds that:
(a) A person depicted in a sexually explicit image taken with the person’s consent may retain a reasonable expectation that the image will remain private despite sharing the image with another person, such as an intimate partner.
(b) It is becoming a common practice for persons to publish a sexually explicit image of another to Internet websites or to disseminate such an image through electronic means without the depicted person’s consent, contrary to the depicted person’s reasonable expectation of privacy, for no legitimate purpose, with the intent of causing substantial emotional distress to the depicted person.
(c) When such images are published on Internet websites, the images are able to be viewed indefinitely by persons worldwide and are able to be easily reproduced and shared.
(d) The publication or dissemination of such images through the use of Internet websites or electronic means creates a permanent record of the depicted person’s private nudity or private sexually explicit conduct.
(e) The existence of such images on Internet websites or the dissemination of such images without the consent of all parties depicted in the images causes those depicted in such images significant psychological harm.
(f) Safeguarding the psychological well-being and privacy interests of persons depicted in such images is compelling.
(2) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Image” includes, but is not limited to, any photograph, picture, motion picture, film, video, or representation.
(b) “Personal identification information” means any information that identifies an individual, and includes, but is not limited to, any name, postal or electronic mail address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, or any unique physical representation.
(c) “Sexually cyberharass” means to publish to an Internet website or disseminate through electronic means to another person a sexually explicit image of a person that contains or conveys the personal identification information of the depicted person without the depicted person’s consent, contrary to the depicted person’s reasonable expectation that the image would remain private, for no legitimate purpose, with the intent of causing substantial emotional distress to the depicted person. Evidence that the depicted person sent a sexually explicit image to another person does not, on its own, remove his or her reasonable expectation of privacy for that image.
(d) “Sexually explicit image” means any image depicting nudity, as defined in s. 847.001, or depicting a person engaging in sexual conduct, as defined in s. 847.001.
(3)(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), a person who willfully and maliciously sexually cyberharasses another person commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(b) A person who has one prior conviction for sexual cyberharassment and who commits a second or subsequent sexual cyberharassment commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(4)(a) A law enforcement officer may arrest, without a warrant, any person that he or she has probable cause to believe has violated this section.
(b) Upon proper affidavits being made, a search warrant may be issued to further investigate violations of this section, including warrants issued to search a private dwelling.
(5) An aggrieved person may initiate a civil action against a person who violates this section to obtain all appropriate relief in order to prevent or remedy a violation of this section, including the following:
(a) Injunctive relief.
(b) Monetary damages to include $10,000 or actual damages incurred as a result of a violation of this section, whichever is greater.
(c) Reasonable attorney fees and costs.
(6) The criminal and civil penalties of this section do not apply to:
(a) A provider of an interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. s. 230(f), information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. s. 153, or communications service as defined in s. 202.11, that provides the transmission, storage, or caching of electronic communications or messages of others; other related telecommunications or commercial mobile radio service; or content provided by another person; or
(b) A law enforcement officer, as defined in s. 943.10, or any local, state, federal, or military law enforcement agency, that publishes a sexually explicit image in connection with the performance of his or her duties as a law enforcement officer, or law enforcement agency.
(7) A violation of this section is committed within this state if any conduct that is an element of the offense, or any harm to the depicted person resulting from the offense, occurs within this state.
History.—s. 1, ch. 2015-24; s. 1, ch. 2019-53; s. 2, ch. 2022-212.
784.0493 Harassment or intimidation based on religious or ethnic heritage.—
(1) As used in this section, the terms “credible threat” and “harass” have the same meaning as in s. 784.048(1).
(2) A person may not willfully and maliciously harass or intimidate another person based on the person’s wearing or displaying of any indicia relating to any religious or ethnic heritage.
(3) A person who violates subsection (2) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(4) A person who violates subsection (2), and in the course of committing the violation makes a credible threat to the person who is the subject of the harassment or intimidation, commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(5) A violation of this section is considered a hate crime for purposes of the reporting requirements of s. 877.19.
History.—s. 2, ch. 2023-24.
784.0495 Mob intimidation.—
(1) It is unlawful for a person, assembled with two or more other persons and acting with a common intent, to use force or threaten to use imminent force, to compel or induce, or attempt to compel or induce, another person to do or refrain from doing any act or to assume, abandon, or maintain a particular viewpoint against his or her will.
(2) A person who violates subsection (1) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(3) A person arrested for a violation of this section shall be held in custody until brought before the court for admittance to bail in accordance with chapter 903.
History.—s. 8, ch. 2021-6.
784.05 Culpable negligence.—
(1) Whoever, through culpable negligence, exposes another person to personal injury commits a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(2) Whoever, through culpable negligence, inflicts actual personal injury on another commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(3) Whoever violates subsection (1) by storing or leaving a loaded firearm within the reach or easy access of a minor commits, if the minor obtains the firearm and uses it to inflict injury or death upon himself or herself or any other person, a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084. However, this subsection does not apply:
(a) If the firearm was stored or left in a securely locked box or container or in a location which a reasonable person would have believed to be secure, or was securely locked with a trigger lock;
(b) If the minor obtains the firearm as a result of an unlawful entry by any person;
(c) To injuries resulting from target or sport shooting accidents or hunting accidents; or
(d) To members of the Armed Forces, National Guard, or State Militia, or to police or other law enforcement officers, with respect to firearm possession by a minor which occurs during or incidental to the performance of their official duties.
When any minor child is accidentally shot by another family member, no arrest shall be made pursuant to this subsection prior to 7 days after the date of the shooting. With respect to any parent or guardian of any deceased minor, the investigating officers shall file all findings and evidence with the state attorney’s office with respect to violations of this subsection. The state attorney shall evaluate such evidence and shall take such action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances and may file an information against the appropriate parties.

1(4) As used in this act, the term “minor” means any person under the age of 16.
History.—s. 1, ch. 5212, 1903; GS 3229; RGS 5062; CGL 7164; s. 733, ch. 71-136; s. 21, ch. 74-383; s. 11, ch. 75-298; ss. 3, 7, ch. 89-534; s. 1199, ch. 97-102.
1Note.—Also published at s. 790.174(3).
784.062 Misuse of laser lighting devices.—
(1) As used in subsection (2), the term “laser lighting device” means a handheld device, not affixed to a firearm, which emits a laser beam that is designed to be used by the operator as a pointer or highlighter to indicate, mark, or identify a specific position, place, item, or object. As used in subsection (3), the term “laser lighting device” means any device designed or used to amplify electromagnetic radiation by stimulated emission.
(2) Any person who knowingly and willfully shines, points, or focuses the beam of a laser lighting device at a law enforcement officer, engaged in the performance of his or her official duties, in such a manner that would cause a reasonable person to believe that a firearm is pointed at him or her commits a noncriminal violation, punishable as provided in s. 775.083.
(3)(a) Any person who knowingly and willfully shines, points, or focuses the beam of a laser lighting device on an individual operating a motor vehicle, vessel, or aircraft commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(b) Any person who knowingly and willfully shines, points, or focuses the beam of a laser lighting device on an individual operating a motor vehicle, vessel, or aircraft and such act results in bodily injury commits a felony of the second degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
History.—s. 1, ch. 2002-80; s. 1, ch. 2005-159.
784.07 Assault or battery of law enforcement officers and other specified personnel; reclassification of offenses; minimum sentences.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Emergency medical care provider” means an ambulance driver, emergency medical technician, paramedic, registered nurse, physician as defined in s. 401.23, medical director as defined in s. 401.23, or any person authorized by an emergency medical service licensed under chapter 401 who is engaged in the performance of his or her duties. The term “emergency medical care provider” also includes physicians, employees, agents, or volunteers of hospitals as defined in chapter 395, who are employed, under contract, or otherwise authorized by a hospital to perform duties directly associated with the care and treatment rendered by the hospital’s emergency department or the security thereof.
(b) “Firefighter” means any person employed by any public employer of this state whose duty it is to extinguish fires; to protect life or property; or to enforce municipal, county, and state fire prevention codes, as well as any law pertaining to the prevention and control of fires.
(c) “Hospital personnel” means a health care practitioner as defined in s. 456.001, an employee, an agent, or a volunteer who is employed, under contract, or otherwise authorized by a hospital, as defined in s. 395.002, to perform duties directly associated with the care and treatment rendered by any department of a hospital or with the security thereof.
(d) “Law enforcement explorer” means any person who is a current member of a law enforcement agency’s explorer program and who is performing functions other than those required to be performed by sworn law enforcement officers on behalf of a law enforcement agency while under the direct physical supervision of a sworn officer of that agency and wearing a uniform that bears at least one patch that clearly identifies the law enforcement agency that he or she represents.
(e) “Law enforcement officer” includes a law enforcement officer, a correctional officer, a correctional probation officer, a part-time law enforcement officer, a part-time correctional officer, an auxiliary law enforcement officer, and an auxiliary correctional officer, as those terms are respectively defined in s. 943.10, and any county probation officer; an employee or agent of the Department of Corrections who supervises or provides services to inmates; an officer of the Florida Commission on Offender Review; a federal law enforcement officer as defined in s. 901.1505; and law enforcement personnel of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, the Department of Environmental Protection, or the Department of Law Enforcement.
(f) “Public transit employees or agents” means bus operators, train operators, revenue collectors, security personnel, equipment maintenance personnel, or field supervisors, who are employees or agents of a transit agency as described in s. 812.015(1).
(g) “Railroad special officer” means a person employed by a Class I, Class II, or Class III railroad pursuant to s. 354.01.
(2) Whenever any person is charged with knowingly committing an assault or battery upon a law enforcement officer, a firefighter, an emergency medical care provider, hospital personnel, a railroad special officer, a traffic accident investigation officer as described in s. 316.640, a nonsworn law enforcement agency employee who is certified as an agency inspector, a blood alcohol analyst, or a breath test operator while such employee is in uniform and engaged in processing, testing, evaluating, analyzing, or transporting a person who is detained or under arrest for DUI, a law enforcement explorer, a traffic infraction enforcement officer as described in s. 316.640, a parking enforcement specialist as defined in s. 316.640, a person licensed as a security officer as defined in s. 493.6101 and wearing a uniform that bears at least one patch or emblem that is visible at all times that clearly identifies the employing agency and that clearly identifies the person as a licensed security officer, or a security officer employed by the board of trustees of a community college, while the officer, firefighter, emergency medical care provider, hospital personnel, railroad special officer, traffic accident investigation officer, traffic infraction enforcement officer, inspector, analyst, operator, law enforcement explorer, parking enforcement specialist, public transit employee or agent, or security officer is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties, the offense for which the person is charged shall be reclassified as follows:
(a) In the case of assault, from a misdemeanor of the second degree to a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(b) In the case of battery, from a misdemeanor of the first degree to a felony of the third degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person convicted of battery upon a law enforcement officer committed in furtherance of a riot or an aggravated riot prohibited under s. 870.01 shall be sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of 6 months.
(c) In the case of aggravated assault, from a felony of the third degree to a felony of the second degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person convicted of aggravated assault upon a law enforcement officer shall be sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of 3 years.
(d) In the case of aggravated battery, from a felony of the second degree to a felony of the first degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person convicted of aggravated battery of a law enforcement officer shall be sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of 5 years.
(3) Any person who is convicted of a battery under paragraph (2)(b) and, during the commission of the offense, such person possessed:
(a) A “firearm” or “destructive device” as those terms are defined in s. 790.001, shall be sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of 3 years.
(b) A semiautomatic firearm and its high-capacity detachable box magazine, as defined in s. 775.087(3), or a machine gun as defined in s. 790.001, shall be sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of 8 years.
Notwithstanding s. 948.01, adjudication of guilt or imposition of sentence shall not be suspended, deferred, or withheld, and the defendant is not eligible for statutory gain-time under s. 944.275 or any form of discretionary early release, other than pardon or executive clemency, or conditional medical release under s. 947.149, prior to serving the minimum sentence.

(4) For purposes of sentencing under chapter 921, a felony violation of this section committed by a person acting in furtherance of a riot or an aggravated riot prohibited under s. 870.01 is ranked one level above the ranking under s. 921.0022 for the offense committed.
History.—s. 1, ch. 76-75; s. 1, ch. 77-174; s. 22, ch. 79-8; s. 1, ch. 80-43; s. 1, ch. 85-33; s. 39, ch. 88-122; s. 2, ch. 88-177; s. 3, ch. 88-373; ss. 52, 55, 57, ch. 88-381; s. 43, ch. 89-526; s. 3, ch. 91-174; s. 12, ch. 93-230; s. 472, ch. 94-356; s. 20, ch. 95-184; s. 1, ch. 96-293; s. 57, ch. 96-388; s. 32, ch. 97-280; s. 1, ch. 98-97; s. 96, ch. 99-3; s. 4, ch. 99-188; s. 227, ch. 99-245; s. 315, ch. 99-248; ss. 1, 2, ch. 2002-209; s. 1, ch. 2006-127; s. 1, ch. 2007-112; s. 1, ch. 2009-102; s. 3, ch. 2010-117; s. 27, ch. 2012-88; s. 2, ch. 2013-114; s. 15, ch. 2014-191; s. 13, ch. 2019-141; s. 9, ch. 2021-6; s. 1, ch. 2023-128; s. 21, ch. 2023-197; s. 4, ch. 2024-69.
784.071 Assault or battery on a law enforcement officer; missing while in line of duty; blue alert.—
(1) At the request of an authorized person employed at a law enforcement agency, the Department of Law Enforcement, in cooperation with the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles and the Department of Transportation, shall activate the emergency alert system and issue a blue alert if all of the following conditions are met:
(a)1. A law enforcement officer has been killed, has suffered serious bodily injury, or has been assaulted with a deadly weapon; or
2. A law enforcement officer is missing while in the line of duty under circumstances evidencing concern for the law enforcement officer’s safety;
(b) The suspect has fled the scene of the offense;
(c) The law enforcement agency investigating the offense determines that the suspect poses an imminent threat to the public or to other law enforcement officers;
(d) A detailed description of the suspect’s vehicle, or other means of escape, or the license plate of the suspect’s vehicle is available for broadcasting;
(e) Dissemination of available information to the public may help avert further harm or assist in the apprehension of the suspect; and
(f) If the law enforcement officer is missing, there is sufficient information available relating to the officer’s last known location and physical description, and the description of any vehicle involved, including the license plate number or other identifying information, to be broadcast to the public and other law enforcement agencies, which could assist in locating the missing law enforcement officer.
(2)(a) The blue alert shall be immediately disseminated to the public through the emergency alert system by broadcasting the alert on television, radio, and the dynamic message signs that are located along the state’s highways.
(b) If a traffic emergency arises requiring that information pertaining to the traffic emergency be displayed on a highway message sign in lieu of the blue alert information, the agency responsible for displaying information on the highway message sign is not in violation of this section.
History.—s. 1, ch. 2011-72.
784.074 Assault or battery on sexually violent predators detention or commitment facility staff; reclassification of offenses.—
(1) Whenever a person is charged with committing an assault or aggravated assault or a battery or aggravated battery upon a staff member of a sexually violent predators detention or commitment facility as defined in part V of chapter 394, while the staff member is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties and when the person committing the offense knows or has reason to know the identity or employment of the victim, the offense for which the person is charged shall be reclassified as follows:
(a) In the case of aggravated battery, from a felony of the second degree to a felony of the first degree.
(b) In the case of an aggravated assault, from a felony of the third degree to a felony of the second degree.
(c) In the case of battery, from a misdemeanor of the first degree to a felony of the third degree.
(d) In the case of assault, from a misdemeanor of the second degree to a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) For purposes of this section, a staff member of the facilities listed includes persons employed by the Department of Children and Families, persons employed at facilities licensed by the Department of Children and Families, and persons employed at facilities operated under a contract with the Department of Children and Families.
History.—s. 1, ch. 2001-244; s. 116, ch. 2002-1; s. 298, ch. 2014-19.
784.075 Battery on detention or commitment facility staff or a juvenile probation officer.—A person who commits a battery on a juvenile probation officer, as defined in s. 984.03 or s. 985.03, on other staff of a detention center or facility as defined in s. 984.03(19) or s. 985.03, or on a staff member of a commitment facility as defined in s. 985.03, commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084. For purposes of this section, a staff member of the facilities listed includes persons employed by the Department of Juvenile Justice, persons employed at facilities licensed by the Department of Juvenile Justice, and persons employed at facilities operated under a contract with the Department of Juvenile Justice.
History.—s. 13, ch. 93-230; s. 71, ch. 94-209; s. 21, ch. 95-152; s. 3, ch. 96-398; s. 49, ch. 98-280; s. 160, ch. 98-403; s. 97, ch. 99-3; s. 24, ch. 99-284; s. 1, ch. 2000-134; s. 9, ch. 2000-135; s. 23, ch. 2001-64; s. 15, ch. 2005-263.
784.076 Battery on health services personnel.—A juvenile who has been committed to or detained by the Department of Juvenile Justice pursuant to a court order, who commits battery upon a person who provides health services commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084. As used in this section, the term “health services” means preventive, diagnostic, curative, or rehabilitative services and includes alcohol treatment, drug abuse treatment, and mental health services.
History.—s. 57, ch. 95-267.
784.078 Battery of facility employee by throwing, tossing, or expelling certain fluids or materials.—
(1) As used in this section, the term “facility” means a state correctional institution defined in s. 944.02(8); a contractor-operated correctional facility defined in s. 944.710 or under chapter 957; a county, municipal, or regional jail or other detention facility of local government under chapter 950 or chapter 951; or a secure facility operated and maintained by the Department of Corrections or the Department of Juvenile Justice.
(2)(a) As used in this section, the term “employee” includes any person employed by or performing contractual services for a public or private entity operating a facility or any person employed by or performing contractual services for the corporation operating the prison industry enhancement programs or the correctional work programs, pursuant to part II of chapter 946.
(b) “Employee” includes any person who is a parole examiner with the Florida Commission on Offender Review.
(3)(a) It is unlawful for any person, while being detained in a facility and with intent to harass, annoy, threaten, or alarm a person in a facility whom he or she knows or reasonably should know to be an employee of such facility, to cause or attempt to cause such employee to come into contact with blood, masticated food, regurgitated food, saliva, seminal fluid, or urine or feces, whether by throwing, tossing, or expelling such fluid or material.
(b) Any person who violates paragraph (a) commits battery of a facility employee, a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
History.—s. 2, ch. 2001-244; s. 16, ch. 2014-191; s. 94, ch. 2015-2; s. 12, ch. 2024-84.
784.08 Assault or battery on persons 65 years of age or older; reclassification of offenses; minimum sentence.—
(1) A person who is convicted of an aggravated assault or aggravated battery upon a person 65 years of age or older shall be sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of 3 years and fined not more than $10,000 and shall also be ordered by the sentencing judge to make restitution to the victim of such offense and to perform up to 500 hours of community service work. Restitution and community service work shall be in addition to any fine or sentence which may be imposed and shall not be in lieu thereof.
(2) Whenever a person is charged with committing an assault or aggravated assault or a battery or aggravated battery upon a person 65 years of age or older, regardless of whether he or she knows or has reason to know the age of the victim, the offense for which the person is charged shall be reclassified as follows:
(a) In the case of aggravated battery, from a felony of the second degree to a felony of the first degree.
(b) In the case of aggravated assault, from a felony of the third degree to a felony of the second degree.
(c) In the case of battery, from a misdemeanor of the first degree to a felony of the third degree.
(d) In the case of assault, from a misdemeanor of the second degree to a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of s. 948.01, adjudication of guilt or imposition of sentence shall not be suspended, deferred, or withheld.
History.—s. 1, ch. 89-327; s. 1, ch. 92-50; s. 18, ch. 93-406; s. 1200, ch. 97-102; s. 19, ch. 97-194; s. 5, ch. 99-188; s. 1, ch. 2002-208.
784.081 Assault or battery on specified officials or employees; reclassification of offenses.—
(1) For purposes of this section, the term “sports official” means any person who serves as a referee, an umpire, or a linesman, and any person who serves in a similar capacity as a sports official who may be known by another title, which sports official is duly registered by or is a member of a local, state, regional, or national organization that is engaged in part in providing education and training to sports officials.
(2) Whenever a person is charged with committing an assault or aggravated assault or a battery or aggravated battery upon any elected official or employee of: a school district; a private school; the Florida School for the Deaf and the Blind; a university lab school; a state university or any other entity of the state system of public education, as defined in s. 1000.04; a sports official; an employee or protective investigator of the Department of Children and Families; an employee of a lead community-based provider and its direct service contract providers; or an employee of the Department of Health or its direct service contract providers, when the person committing the offense knows or has reason to know the identity or position or employment of the victim, the offense for which the person is charged shall be reclassified as follows:
(a) In the case of aggravated battery, from a felony of the second degree to a felony of the first degree.
(b) In the case of aggravated assault, from a felony of the third degree to a felony of the second degree.
(c) In the case of battery, from a misdemeanor of the first degree to a felony of the third degree.
(d) In the case of assault, from a misdemeanor of the second degree to a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(3) An assault, aggravated assault, battery, or aggravated battery upon a sports official shall be reclassified pursuant to subsection (2) only if such offense is committed upon the sports official when he or she is actively participating as a sports official in an athletic contest or immediately following such athletic contest.
History.—s. 3, ch. 96-293; s. 293, ch. 99-8; s. 11, ch. 2001-68; s. 1037, ch. 2002-387; s. 19, ch. 2004-41; s. 1, ch. 2004-276; s. 48, ch. 2004-350; s. 299, ch. 2014-19.
784.082 Assault or battery by a person who is being detained in a prison, jail, or other detention facility upon visitor or other detainee; reclassification of offenses.—Whenever a person who is being detained in a prison, jail, or other detention facility is charged with committing an assault or aggravated assault or a battery or aggravated battery upon any visitor to the detention facility or upon any other detainee in the detention facility, the offense for which the person is charged shall be reclassified as follows:
(1) In the case of aggravated battery, from a felony of the second degree to a felony of the first degree.
(2) In the case of aggravated assault, from a felony of the third degree to a felony of the second degree.
(3) In the case of battery, from a misdemeanor of the first degree to a felony of the third degree.
(4) In the case of assault, from a misdemeanor of the second degree to a misdemeanor of the first degree.
History.—s. 4, ch. 96-293.
784.083 Assault or battery on code inspectors.—Whenever a person is charged with committing an assault or aggravated assault or a battery or aggravated battery upon a code inspector, as defined in s. 162.04(2), while the code inspector is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties and when the person committing the offense knows or has reason to know the identity or employment of the victim, the offense for which the person is charged shall be reclassified as follows:
(1) In the case of aggravated battery, from a felony of the second degree to a felony of the first degree.
(2) In the case of aggravated assault, from a felony of the third degree to a felony of the second degree.
(3) In the case of battery, from a misdemeanor of the first degree to a felony of the third degree.
(4) In the case of assault, from a misdemeanor of the second degree to a misdemeanor of the first degree.
History.—s. 1, ch. 98-24.
784.085 Battery of child by throwing, tossing, projecting, or expelling certain fluids or materials.—
(1) It is unlawful for any person, except a child as defined in this section, to knowingly cause or attempt to cause a child to come into contact with blood, seminal fluid, or urine or feces by throwing, tossing, projecting, or expelling such fluid or material.
(2) Any person, except a child as defined in this section, who violates this section commits battery of a child, a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(3) As used in this section, the term “child” means a person under 18 years of age.
History.—s. 85, ch. 2000-139.
784.086 Reproductive battery.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Donor” means a person who donates reproductive material, regardless of whether for personal use or compensation.
(b) “Health care practitioner” has the same meaning as provided in s. 456.001.
(c) “Recipient” means a person who receives reproductive material from a donor.
(d) “Reproductive material” means any human “egg” or “sperm” as those terms are defined in s. 742.13, or a human zygote.
(e) “Zygote” means a fertilized ovum.
(2) A health care practitioner may not intentionally transfer into the body of a recipient human reproductive material or implant a human embryo of a donor, knowing the recipient has not consented to the use of the human reproductive material or human embryo from that donor.
(a) A health care practitioner who violates this section commits reproductive battery, a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(b) A health care practitioner who violates this section and who is the donor of the reproductive material commits a felony of the second degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the period of limitation for a violation under this section does not begin to run until the date on which the violation is discovered and reported to law enforcement or any other governmental agency.
(4) It is not a defense to the crime of reproductive battery that the recipient consented to an anonymous donor.
History.—s. 6, ch. 2020-31.